All right, so for the first code
that we're gonna write today,
we're gonna be writing bubble sort.
Now bubble sort is actually not
a algorithm that you're ever going to use
directly in production.
Because there are algorithms that are just
strictly better than bubble sort,
but it really fits super well with the
mental model that humans would think of
how to sort numbers.
So the first thing I'll tell you today,
a lot of algorithms is about sorting.
We're gonna be doing, I think,
six different sorts today.
And the reason for that is it's
demonstrative of the ability to
write algorithms in the sense of
we're trying to show how you can
take a large set of numbers and
do a holistic action with them.
And the various different strategies that
you can do to minimize the work that
that you're doing, and which is to say
that you may not ever write quicksort or
merge sort, insertion sort directly.
In fact, I imagine you never will
because the language is actually
better at doing it than you are.
But you will be able to take
apart these algorithms and
use them kind of piecemeal here and there.
I remember I've interviewed
at Facebook years and
years ago to be on the React core team.
And the algorithm that I used to solve
the question that they asked was
actually merge sort, just kind of
dissected and reput back together.
So that's kind of the mindset I want
you to have here is you're probably
not gonna sort too many
numbers directly by hand,
by code, but you will use these algorithms
kind of pieced apart and reapplied.
Okay, so I'm just giving you some
justification of why I'm gonna have you
sort so many damn numbers.
So this is kind of a fun little graphic.
It's from Wikipedia of how bubble
sort actually looks over time.
And the way that works,
you can see that the biggest numbers
bubble up to the top, right?
That's why it's called bubble sort is cuz
the biggest numbers over time end up being
bubbling up to the top, and then it sorts
the smaller part of the array over time.
And the way it works is this,
is you're just gonna go over the array,
and if the item at index one is
bigger than the item at index two,
then you're gonna swap index one and
index two, right?
And then you're just
gonna keep doing that.
You're gonna say,
is this one bigger than this one?
No, okay, next item,
Yes, swap them, right?
And then you just kinda swap them.
So let's look at kind
of a drawn out version.
So let's say we're gonna sort
this one here, 1, 5, 4, 3, 2.
The first question you ask starting at the
beginning, is 1 and 5 out of order, right?
Is 1 larger than 5?
It's not, right?
Next thing, is 5 larger than 4?
Yes, then you swap.
And then you end up with an array
that looks like this 1, 4, 5, 2, 3.
Now, notice here that 5 is
the largest item in the array.
So is it larger than those things?
The answer is always going to be yes,
right?
So that's why 5 is going
to bubble to the top.
So are 5 and 2 out of order?
Yes, swap, are 5 and 3 out of order?
Yes, swap, and now we've gone through
the entire iteration once, right?
We've gone through the entire array.
Is it sorted yet?
No, right, 4 is still here out of order.
So that's kind of the inner, or
sorry, yeah, what we did here,
this is the inner loop, which is asking,
are the two numbers out of order?
And then there's an outer loop that says,
hey, during my last iteration,
did anything swap?
If the answer to that question is yes,
then you do it again.
If you go through it and nothing swaps,
that means the array is sorted and
you're done, right?
So end of the array, did anything swap?
The answer is yes.
So then we start all over again.
1 and 4 out of order?
No, 4 and 2 out of order?
Yes, so you swap those.
Are 4 and 3 out of order?
Yes, swap, and
we've reached the end of the array again.
Now notice we don't have to ask,
are 4 and 5 out of order?
This is a bit of an optimization.
You don't actually have to do this.
But after the first iteration, you can
guarantee that the last item in the array
is definitely the largest item, right,
because it'll bubble to the top.
Which means we can progressively look
at less than the rest of the array.
So after two iterations,
we can guarantee that the last two items
are definitely the largest two
items in the array, right,
due to the method of
how bubble sort works.
Okay, so are 4 and 5 out of order?
No, in fact, so this question
here was technically unnecessary.
You hit the end of the array,
did anything swap?
The answer's yes,
we had a couple swaps here.
And now notice it actually is sorted,
right 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
But because something swapped
in the last iteration,
we have to go through it again, right?
[COUGH] So are 1 and 2 out of order,
2 and 3, 3 and 4, 4 and 5?
And then here, we hit the end of
the array and nothing swapped.
So now we know this is in order.
So since nothing swapped, we break
the outer loop, and we're done, right?
So that is the end of that
particular sorting algorithm.
So I talked about this a little bit,
which is after the first run through,
the largest item's at the end.
After the second iteration, the second
largest item's at the end, so on and
so forth.
Cool, so that's optimization right there.
It would make a difference
in the coefficient.
It wouldn't actually make
the big O any better.
But it does guarantee that
it'd run a little bit faster.
So what's the time complexity?
What's the computational
complexity of this algorithm?
>> Someone online is saying,
the best case scenario is four of n.
>> Yep, so let's talk about
the average case first, and
then we'll loop back to the best case.
>> And they're saying the average
case is O of n squared.
>> Yeah, so there's gonna be
an outer while loop, right?
That's gonna say while something swapped,
then continue doing the inner
part of that loop, right?
And then the inner loop is gonna be a for
loop, which is going to loop over
the array every single time, right?
So we have a outer while loop and
an inner for loop.
What does that look like?
It's gonna be n squared, right?
So that's gonna be the average case and
it's also gonna be, well,
we'll talk about worst case
here in just a second.
But the average case here is that we
have an outer loop and an inner loop,
which means we're gonna
end up with n squared.
Because every item in
a bubble sort more or
less has to be compared to
every other item in the array.
That's kinda the question that
you're gonna ask yourself is,
does every item in the array, at some
point say, is this larger than this?
And the answer for a bubble sort is yeah,
every item will see every
other item in the array.
So that's gonna make the average
case of this n squared.
The worst case scenario for
a bubble sort is a reverse sorted list.
So if this came in as 5, 4, 3, 2, 1,
that means that we're gonna have
to do a lot of swapping, right?
And we're gonna have to ask,
is this greater than this?
So that's gonna be the worst case
scenario is a reverse sorted list.
The best case scenario is going to be n,
which is going to be a sorted list, right?
Cuz if this was 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
it would go through the array once and
say, hey, we did no swaps, I'm done.
What's the spatial complexity of this?
It's just, sorry, go ahead.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> It's constant, that's correct.
We're not creating any additional arrays.
We're not doing anything like that.
We're just operating on the array itself,
which means that no new memory is
being called into use here,
which means it's gonna be constant time.
Okay?
So the next question, which we haven't
talked about yet, is this sort stable?
And again,
we haven't talked about that yet.
A stable sort that says if two items
are considered equal in this sort,
are they guaranteed to be in
the same order when they come back?
So here,
I have a little array that says state,
which has Sarah Dresner,
Shirley Wu, and Scott Moss.
Scott and Shirley both live in California.
And let's say we were sorting by state.
For this to be a stable sort,
we'd have to guarantee because Shirley
came first in the array that
she would come before Scott.
Some sorting algorithms do not guarantee
that, right, that if one of them comes
first, it may not come first when it comes
back, and that would be an unstable sort.
Sometimes that's important to you.
Sometimes that's not important to you.
So in this particular case, Yes,
bubble sort is considered a stable sort,
right?
Because you just would never swap them,
which means that in this particular case,
Shirley would be guaranteed to be ahead of
Scott if we did this sort based on speed.
And the last one that we didn't talk about
is this sort is what's called destructive.
That means that it's actually
operating on the array itself.
So if I pass an input into bubble sort,
it's going to operate on bubble sort or
the array itself,
which means that if I wanted to keep
a copy of the original unsorted array,
I would have to make a copy beforehand,
right?
Some sorts will return
brand new arrays and
do not operate on the original array,
which those would not be destructive.
But in this case,
bubble sort is destructive cuz it's
actually modifying the original input.
Which if any of you
are functional programmers,
that feels really gross, right?
But sometimes that's a good thing, right?
Because we're not increasing
some of the spatial complexity.
So again, it's a trade-off.
In this particular case, it's okay
to operate on the original input.
And you should in this particular case.
So again,
functional programmers love rules.
Never operate on the input.
And I want to refer you back to
our trade-off's number one rule,
there are no rules, right?
So in this particular case,
we want to modify our inputs.